---
title: "Photographic agencies"
date: "2021-03-29"
author: "Clara Bouveresse"
theme_id: "cinema"
type: "articles"
lang: "en"
slug: "/articles/agence-photo/"
draft: false
---

At the beginning of the 20th century, the advent of photojournalism
and the illustrated press in Europe and the United States led to the
development of photo agencies. Their function was to provide customers
with an array of pictures that was as precise and varied as possible,
for the purposes of journalism or illustration. Some agencies
specialized in one or the other of these areas. For illustration, they
simply assembled huge collections corresponding to a wide variety of
demand, from postcards to textbooks. For the press, photographers worked
quickly to be the first to cover a subject or event, because news photos
were a perishable good. Over time, these photos lost their current news
value and became documentation of recent history. Press agencies
frequently accumulated archives over the years, thus also effectively
becoming illustration resources.

The agency served as an interface between photographer and publication
(newspaper, magazine, editor). It allowed reporters to focus on their
work on the ground by facilitating the development, dissemination and
archiving of pictures, in exchange for a commission on sales. It could
offer these reporters topics or job orders and provide them a long-term
international network for selling their work. While some agencies
operated locally, many reached foreign markets. This
internationalization was a good fit for the illustrated press, whose
reporters traveled the continents in constant pursuit of distant and
exotic stories.

# The propagation of the photo-essay

The first French agencies, created at the beginning of the century
(Henri Manuel in 1900, [Rol](http://blog.bnf.fr/gallica/index.php/2015/09/14/les-repertoires-thematiques-de-lagence-rol-1904-1937/) in 1904 and [Meurisse](http://blog.bnf.fr/gallica/index.php/2011/04/12/les-photographies-de-lagence-meurisse/) in 1909), experienced
competition in the 1930s from the American agencies Keystone and Wide
World, who opened offices in Paris in 1927, and from newcomers like
Rapho, Alliance Photo and [France
Presse](https://www.afp.com/fr/lagence/lafp-en-dates), who came to dominate the
market. The latter two were developed in the context of economic crisis
and the expansion of the illustrated press. They brought together many
Jewish photographers and editors who were fleeing the rising Nazi tide.
Some later went to the United States to practice their profession. The
Pix and Black Star agencies, founded in 1936 by Germans living in New
York, employed many immigrant photographers.

Black Star was launched by Kurt Kornfeld, Ernest Mayer (who had created
the Mauritius agency in Berlin) and Kurt Safranski, the former editor of
_Berliner Illustrierte Zeitung_. They used their experience in the
German illustrated press market to their advantage, developing the
photo-essay genre in the United States. Rather than being shown as
isolated images, photos were sequenced to tell a story and were given a
central spot in the page layout. The founders of Black Star advised
press magnate Henry Luce (China, 1898 - U.S., 1967) on the launch of the
weekly magazine _Life_ (1936), which specialized in photo-essays. Black
Star became a platform allowing photographers from Europe to have
careers in the United States and to work for _Life_ magazine.

In this way practices that were developed in Europe (and especially
Berlin) came together in the United States. The photo-essay genre was
similarly disseminated through agent networks in the Communist press: in
the magazine _Regards_ in France and _Arbeiter Illustrierte Zeitung_ in
Germany. This weekly magazine relied particularly on the resources of
Russ-Foto, created in 1924 after a meeting at the Kremlin focusing on
the exchange and distribution of Soviet photos abroad. Russ-Foto offered
images of life and culture in the USSR, and collaborated with foreign
so-called "bourgeois" commercial agencies in places as far afield as
Tokyo, New York, Washington and Calcutta, though its primary partners
were in Germany and France.

In the period between the two world wars, the rise of the illustrated
press and the photo-essay format was dependent on international exchange
between agencies on both sides of the Atlantic, and on the constant
movement of photographers, many of whom emigrated to escape increasing
totalitarianism.

<div class="tracs-resource center" data-id="338"></div>

<div class="tracs-resource center" data-id="339"></div>

# Cosmopolitanism and Universalist ambition

After the Second World War, this cosmopolitan spirit gave birth to the
Magnum agency, which still today is a recognized brand for many
photographers. Its founders, whose origins are Hungarian (Robert Capa),
Polish (David Seymour, known as "Chim"), French (Henri Cartier-Bresson),
English (George Rodger) and American (William Vandivert), chose from the
start to have offices in Paris and New York. Maria Eisner (Italy, 1909 -
U.S., 1991), after having come from Germany to direct Alliance Photo and
taken refuge in the United States during the war, was the head of the
Paris office. Magnum's business model was to take advantage of this
existing transatlantic structure to sell a single news report to
different customers, offering exclusive rights in different geographical
zones in Europe or America.

Born Endre Friedmann, [Robert Capa](https://transatlantic-cultures.org/en/catalog/la-photographie-americaine-une-invention-europeenne) (Austria Hungary, 1913-Indochina, 1954) was the key player in this strategy; for him, photographers should
henceforth have the status of authors and be paid for each publication.
Rather than give up their negatives to customers, they could distribute
photos via the largest possible network, while retaining the rights over
time, in order to maximize profit. This assertion of authorial rights
was part of a continuous overarching expansion of such rights during the
20th century. It first came in response to an economic necessity, but
it also corresponded to a journalistic and even artistic ambition: to
make a name for oneself, and to be able to put a recognizable signature
on iconic images associated with certain historical events. Robert Capa
personally experienced such a success, having produced some of the most
famous shots of the Spanish Civil War and the D-Day landing.

<div class="tracs-resource center" data-id="345"></div>

Magnum demanded that magazines post the author's name for each image,
ban cropping, and use captions that respect the context of the shot. The
author-photographers offered their customers full blown investigations
constructed around a narrative thread, accompanied by a testimony, and
featuring a unique look at exclusive subjects. They could thus expect to
sell their customers a series of photos—a photo-essay—rather than
individual shots. To do this, Magnum showed its customers on both sides
of the Atlantic "distributions" made up of sequenced and captioned
images. It also created partnerships with other agencies worldwide, like
ABC Press in the Netherlands, Zardoya in Spain, John Hillelson in the
UK, and Pacific Press in Japan. Every week they circulated a memo
indicating where each photographer was, and what subject they were
treating, in order to facilitate relations with potential customers.

<div class="tracs-resource center" data-id="342"></div>

<div class="tracs-resource center" data-id="343"></div>

This transatlantic business model depended on the valuing of the
authorial figure, and on a profoundly universalist ethic. After the war,
"concerned" photographers wanted to participate in the reconstruction of
a peaceful world; they traveled in the most distant countries to bear
witness to the life conditions of the women and men they encountered.
Photography was perceived as a universal language, accessible to all
regardless of language, revealing the commonalities of our humanity,
rather than the differences. This ambition was at the heart of the
exhibit [_The Family of
Man_](https://www.moma.org/calendar/exhibitions/2429), organized by the conservator Edward
Steichen (Luxembourg, 1879-U.S., 1973) in 1955 at the Museum of Modern
Art in New York. It brought together photos taken all over the world,
relying in part on Magnum's resources.

<div class="tracs-resource center" data-id="344"></div>

# Author-photographers and Subjective drafts

But this exhibit and the universalist model soon gave rise to a debate:
was this humanist gaze, supposedly understandable by all, nothing more
than the gaze of the white privileged reporter, blind to the mechanisms
of colonial domination and cultural difference, projecting his
stereotypes and his fascination for exoticism as he journeyed
indiscriminately? In the 1960s, several photographers adopted a new
position. Rather than presuming to embody objectivity or universal
values, they forefronted the subjective, critical, and sometimes
autobiographical facets of their work. In the wake of the rise of "New
Journalism" in the U.S., journalistic draft in the first person gave
new momentum to authorial photography, propagated especially in
prestigious formats like exhibits and books. Magnum participated in the
transatlantic distribution of these creations. In France, the humanist
current remained popular, but young photographers were inspired by the
experimentations of their American counterparts. During the 1970s, the
economic model of the author-photographer was the basis for the creation
of new agencies that sought to emulate Magnum, like Gamma, Sygma, Sipa
and Viva in Paris, and F4 in Brazil.

<div class="tracs-resource center" data-id="346"></div>

The illustrated press market, always more international and competitive,
encountered multiple crises starting in the 1960s, in the face of higher
production costs and the competition of television. The large text and
image agencies, called "wire services," like [France
Presse](https://www.afp.com/fr/produits-services/photo),
[Reuters](https://pictures.reuters.com/) and
[AP](http://www.apimages.com/) (Associated Press), had the means to maintain an international
network, to invest in the latest equipment and to keep the short
turnaround times needed to furnish photos to newspapers. Author agencies
targeted specific magazines and adopted various strategies such as
specializing in a field like travel or sport, taking a chance on
lucrative trades like celebrity photos, or diversifying.

"Corporate" photography—orders for businesses—which had first been
developed in the United States in the 1950s, spread through Europe and
became a non-negligible source of revenue for some photographers, who
adapted the photo-essay or the reporting genres to a business context,
to illustrate annual reports or enhance a brand image.

Exhibits and books also offered outlets for agencies that claimed the
status of author for their members and participated in the promotion of
documentary photography as a cultural heritage. This cultural heritage
movement was especially on display in France during the 1980s, when the
Ministry of Culture under Jack Lang was highlighting photography.

The U.S. pioneered the development of a market for photographic prints,
henceforth collected and recognized as art objects and sought after
because of their rarity. The Magnum agency invested in this area by
offering limited edition prints and collaborating with galleries, like
that of Howard Greenberg in New York. The oldest prints in agency photo
libraries started being displayed at international fairs because they
could lay claim to "vintage" status. Author-photographer agencies have
thus gotten less and less of their revenue from the press and have
adopted a diversification strategy: selling prints, publishing books,
doing orders for businesses, and collaborating with NGOs.

Despite this diversification, the agencies' business model remains
precarious, especially in the context of the digital transition. This
transition represents large investments, including the cost of
digitizing archives for the historical agencies, who then make them
available online. Author rights, which are the economic foundation of
the sector, are also increasingly called into question: images draft
online evade all control and are drowned in a mass of constant
proliferation. The value of an image is attached less to its exclusivity
and rarity than to the extent of its visibility. To do well in this
environment, agencies and photographers must attract large numbers of
visitors to their pages and social networks, so they can have weight in
the digital economy. The role of agencies and their networks are called
into question by the dematerialization of exchange. Some photographers
can get by without them by reaching out directly to their public through
social media (especially Instagram), attracting orders because they have
a high number of followers, and thus offering a larger media exposure to
their customers.

In this globalized and digital context, agencies are still very
international, bringing photographers to varied horizons and functioning
on all the continents. Most of the market is concentrated in the hands
of a few large press agencies and image banks like Getty and Corbis, who
bought the collections of many historical entities. At the same time,
the small author agencies, collectives, and photo associations endure
(Myop, Noor, VU, etc.). The transatlantic dynamics, that had overseen
the rise of agencies, is now implanted into a larger network, that of
web publications, exhibits and festivals that are held the world over.
